The second thing, the second
psychological pillar to really creating
high-converting websites is
defeating cognitive load.
And I would go as far as saying this is
probably the best thing you can do, right?
And this is where design becomes so,
so important.
Now, if you haven't come
across cognitive load before,
it's basically because of the way
system two works, our conscious brain.
Because our conscious brain
is a finite resource,
if you're doing too many
things at the same time,
your cognitive load goes up and
you get overwhelmed and can't cope, right?
And that causes some really
interesting scenarios.
So first of all, let's talk about
what causes high cognitive load.
Have you ever had those
mornings where you wake up and
you're just in a bad mood, right?
Doesn't matter, maybe you had a bad
dream or something like that.
And notice what happens on those days,
everything goes wrong, all right?
If you wake up in a bad mood,
the day just gets worse, okay?
It's like everybody annoys you.
Everything's more difficult than normal.
And that's because your bad mood increases
your cognitive load, makes it higher.
So that's one way that cognitive
load can be a problem.
So if you're using dark patterns on
your site and irritating people,
they're gonna be in a bad mood,
which means they're gonna find
the website harder to use, all right?
The second thing is inconsistencies.
So for example,
if the navigation moves around or
the design is inconsistent
through the website,
it confuses people,
their cognitive load goes up.
And as you'll see in a minute,
that causes bad consequences.
Then there's just a confusing
display with too much going on,
too much trying to grab your attention.
That increases cognitive load as well.
And the final one is we're poorly primed.
In other words, when we hit a website or
a webpage, it doesn't perform
as we expected it to perform.
So a really classic example
of that is search, right?
If you go to a website,
where do you look to search?
The chances are your eye immediately
goes to the right-hand corner,
doesn't it, right?
That's often where a search box is.
And you're looking,
your eye is looking for an input field,
probably with a button beside it.
And then everything that you've
learned previously tells you to type
into that input field your search term and
press search, right?
That's called procedure knowledge,
where we learn that a certain
series of steps leads to a result.
But if your website is different for
whatever reason, then you're gonna
increase people's cognitive load.
And I could give you a real-world
example of this on my own website.
This was quite a while ago.
I've learnt my lesson here.
But I designed a website wherein the top
right-hand corner was a call to action for
people to sign up to my newsletter.
And it had a box for email address and
a signup button next to it.
And it was so ingrained in people to look
there for search that I would regularly
get emails from people saying
your search isn't working.
Cuz they typed in a search term,
hit submit, and, of course,
it wasn't an email address,
so it invalidated it.
It wouldn't come up cuz it
was a newsletter signup.
But people were so
confused that I overwhelmed them.
Their cognitive load went up so
high that they made mistakes.
And a high cognitive load is
devastating to your conversion on
your website, absolutely devastating.
For a start,
your website is gonna feel difficult.
It's gonna feel like hard work, right?
But that's fairly obvious.
But then you start to get some really
bizarre behavior that comes out of high
cognitive load.
So we end up feeling like
something's unfair, right?
So you might have a really good deal on
your website, a really good offering,
right, for a fair reasonable price.
But if your website is hard to use and
people's cognitive load is high,
that deal won't look as good to them,
right?
Just a weird fluke of human psychology.
Also, they're more likely to think
you're lying on the website.
They're not gonna trust
your testimonials as much.
your reviews as much,
just because your website's hard to use.
And they're just gonna feel bad
about the whole experience.
So cognitive load is so, so important.
But I recognize it's quite a difficult
concept to wrap your head around.
So what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna
play a little video, right?.
The instructions are gonna be written
on the screen, okay, and they come up.
And I want you to try and
follow the instructions, and
we'll come back afterwards and
we'll see what you say, all right?
Are you ready?
Okay, you need to pay attention to this.
Yeah.
How many passes did
the team in white make?
Did you get it right?
Did you get 13?
But did you see the moonwalking bear?
You see it?
Now that, if you did the exercise and
if you didn't see the moonwalking bear,
that was because your cognitive
load was overwhelmed.
Now, some people will see
the moonwalking bear.
It might not work with you.
You might have spotted it, and
that could happen for a number of reasons.
One reason is you might just
be very relaxed anyway, right?
That there were outside factors going
on where you were in a really good
environment, and so
you saw the moonwalking bear.
Others of you who didn't see it
might have been in a really busy,
stressful work environment or not giving
this presentation your full attention or
whatever else, so you missed it.
But the point is because you
were concentrating on counting,
your cognitive load shot up and
you missed the moonwalking bear.
So that is a great example of where
cognitive load can be enormously damaging.
Because if you can miss a moonwalking
bear, it means you can miss a call to
action, a critical piece of content,
or anything else on your website.
So we need to reduce
people's cognitive load.
So how do we do that?
Well, the most simple way is to
simplify your user interface, right,
to have less balls being passed and
less players on the field so
the moonwalking bear stands out more.
And we're gonna talk about that more
later when we get into design and
how design works and how design can be
used to reduce people's cognitive load.
There's some very simple techniques
that you can use around that.
Other things you could do is design for
maximum visibility so
that the user's eye is drawn to
the moonwalking bear, right?
If that moonwalking bear
was wearing lime green,
for example,
would have stood out a lot more.
If the moonwalking bear had been
a lot taller than the other players,
he would have stood out a lot more and you
would have been more likely to see him.
So we're gonna get into that as well
as we talk about design later on.
But we can also do it through
techniques like chunking.
I don't know whether you're aware
of the idea of chunking, but
basically, if you've got a lot of options,
if you've got a lot of players, for
example, on a basketball court.
Then you can group them together,
and so your moonwalking bear
would have stood out more because
he would be in a group of his own.
That's a bit of a overstretched analogy.
So let me give you an easier one, right?
Your credit card,
if you look at your credit card,
it's got 16-digit number, right?
There's no way our system two brain or
system one for
that matter is capable of
holding 16 digits in your head.
You just can't do it.
It's not possible.
So what the credit cards do, they split
it into four groups of four cuz it makes
it easier for us to remember and
read back that number.
And we can use exactly the same
techniques with things
like the navigation on a website, okay?
Instead of having eight options, right,
have two groups of four options,
makes it a lot easier for people to
process that information, right, and
keeps their cognitive load low.
Another example would be email,
sorry, e-commerce categories, okay?
If we have lots of e-commerce categories,
then group them together to make
them easier for people to process.
So again, we can get into all
of this kind of thing more.